Welcome to
Controller Ready Navigation. By the end of the video we'll have
achieved something simple but important, which is that if we start the game from main
menu and play the game...
I'm going to use only the gamepad now. If I hit the A button on the gamepad, the
start button takes us into the game, and if I hit the back button on the gamepad, we can
actually quit the game. So, there are an important couple of things to be able
to do, is to be able to navigate the game by shortcuts
and keyboard presses. So, see you in there!
So, whether we're targeting our game for the consoles or for Mac stroke PC,
we're going to want controller support. Here's a Steam Store page,
and you'll notice there's a load of little cards on here and one of those is for Full
Controller Support. We want to get that Full Controller Support all the time that we're
making a game that is suitable for a controller. Maybe not some types of
strategy games, but certainly a game like this, you'd expect the controller to work, and if somebody runs
Steam in say big picture mode, we want to make sure that in this mode they can
sit on their sofa, from this point, and navigate Steam through the library
to your game. And when they get there, you see that badge on the DG2?
Above the tick sign there's a controller badge. There's a keyboard badge there on Call of
the Starseed, there's a keyboard badge on Lunar Flight. And if I try and load Lunar Flight,
I get this horrible warning, "Keyboard/Mouse-Focused Game". We don't want that in a game that
is perfectly capable of running on a controller. So, we need to, from the beginning, be thinking
about making sure that we support controllers properly. So, let's do that.
Let's go into our project, to the main menu. If we play the main
menu, at the moment, the controller can't select the start button, and indeed the start button
doesn't do anything. So, let's start by giving the start button some
functionality. That's relatively simple, we go to the MainMenu blueprint.
You click on the StartButton. It wants to be bold in your
hierarchy of your main memory blueprint, which means that it is variable. If you turn off
Is Variable, it's no longer interact-able. Once Is Variable is on, which it will be by default
for a button, then you go down to the OnClicked Events, and you
click +. So you're adding an event. Now, what's going to happen when I release the mouse button is, that we're going to switch from the Designer
tab at the top-right of the screen, automatically into the graph for this particular
widget blueprint. There we go, so we're just there! We were in Designer, we're now in
Graph. OK, so I'm going to get rid of these unnecessary events
to keep the screen clean, and I'm going to tell the system what we want to do when we click the
(StartButton). We're doing this in blueprint, because it's very much a designer's job and it's simple UI programming.
What we're going to do is, we're going to want to open a level. So, if you do a search for "open"...
And we're going to reference the level by
string, unfortunately, which is the BattleGround. So, we're going to go and copy
the word BattleGround, paste it in here. This
blueprint widget here will automatically convert this BattleGround string into an F name,
and we'll be good to go. So, let's try it! Let's make sure that playing
allows us to load a level. Whah oh! For the
first time we have loaded a level. Now we have some issues. Firstly,
if we were on this menu here and we try and hit start with the mouse
button, it's not going to work, and that's because we haven't told this start button
that we want it to be selected on
loading of this widget. OK, there's nothing making the start
button actually ready to go. So, how are we going to do that? Where would
we put this code? It's a bit tricky, because in the MainMenu blueprint,
we want to do it but in what even? You know, this is bound to the
main menu. Whenever you load up the main menu screen, you want to make that start button
unselected, but there's no event to do that, so let's create a Custom Event.
And this custom event's going to be called Widget
Ready. OK, so I did that by right-clicking in the widget
main menu blueprint graph, adding an event, and then saying add custom
event. So, we're going to have a WidgetReady event. Now, what's going to fire the
WidgetReady event? Well, we're going to go to the level blueprint for the MainMenu.
And it already does some stuff right, setting up the UI,
and the last thing it wants to do, when it's finished creating the blueprint,
adding it to the viewport, etc., is making the mouse visible,
is it wants to go ahead and say, well actually now the widget is
ready. So, the place to get the reference for that is from the
MainMenu blueprint widget, because it is the MainMenu blueprint where we created
this custom event. So, if I move these other guys up a little bit, to make some room,
then we can take the reference of the MainMenu
blueprint and we can find this ready event, WidgetReady.
And we'll fire that event, when we have finished setting up the
rest of the UI. OK, so this will do for now. This means that
once the mouse cursor is shown, we then pass execution over
here. Now, the reason my compiler has failed is simply because on the MainMenu blueprint I didn't compile this.
So, back at the MainMenu blueprint, execution has passed here. What do we do?
This is where we're going to talk about the input modes. Once the widget
is ready, let's have a look. Do a search for "UI", and you'll see one of the options
here is to Set Input Mode UI Only. Well,
we're on a menu, so we only need to be in UI. There's also the option of Game
and UI. Now this basically depends what the mouse
does when it's moved. If you're in a strategy game, you want Game and UI,
because as you move your mouse around it would actually move a cursor. If you
wanted to say rotate the map with your mouse, you'd have to hold a mouse key down. Whereas
with UI only it's going to assume that, as you move the mouse around, that you want that
to actually just show a mouse cursor and move around the screen, alright.
There's also a game only, which we'll use in the tank game, but
for the moment, we want Set Input Mode UI Only. It's going to ask some questions
or ask for some references. It's going to ask for a player controller, so let's go and get that.
Get Player Controller, so that it knows
where to get the mouse from. And it's also
going to want to know what widget you want me to focus. Now this is the thing, we grab the
Start Menu, from the Variables part of the My Blueprint tab, and drop it in, get the
reference, and drop it into there. So, what this means now
is that once the widget is ready, we're going to set the input to UI
Only. Let's see if it works. And yes,
I hit the A button and we came into the game. Let's show that again!
We're there, we could hit the Return button on the keyboard or the A button on an Xbox 360
controller, and we go into the game. So, that is the first step towards us getting
ourselves ready for controller support. I think the second thing we want to do
is to just make sure we can get out of the game as well, and then, at least we can
start and quit the game right. So, where would be organize to be
able to get out of the game? Well, we would be in the BattleGround game itself,
so let's go to BattleGround. We're going to need to bind
some input. I'll do that with you and then I'll
challenge you to just get the tiny bit of blueprint going. There's going to be an Action Mapping
for an action called Quit or it could be Quit Menu in
future but Quit for now. We'll use say the Escape key,
and I'm going to use the Gamepad's
special left button, which in the case of an Xbox 360 is the Back button, and
Start would be Special Right. Anyway, Special Left is the Back
button. So now, we have a quit action. Alright, now this
is an aspect that applies to the whole BattleGround
level. So we open the level blueprint, and it's in here that you need to go
find that event and make sure that we actually quit the game, when that happens. So,
that's what I want you to pause the video and have a go at doing. Look and see if you can find that action we
just created and then call the quit game node
and test to see if you can quit the game by hitting the back button on the controller. Go ahead, pause the
video and do that now.
Welcome back! So, this is relatively simple, if
we look for the Quit game event, Action Event there.
When Quit game is pressed, we want to
quit the game. Now, of course, you'd really put a menu in between, but we'll
do that later. We don't need to do anything else, that's it! We just compile that,
play the game, and if we
hit the back button on the controller, the game immediately quits. That's great! Now,
we'll see that in a little bit more detail, when we compile and actually build
for a proper PC executable, in a moment, and make sure that we can get through the full game loop,
simple as it is, without touching the mouse and keyboard. So, we'll see you there!